Hello, and welcome back
to the course on Deep Learning.
Today we're talking about sparse autoencoders.
So as we previously discussed,
we are aiming to create an autoencoder where
the hidden layer is actually greater than the input layer.
And the reason for that is we want to extract more features.
And we know that autoencorders are designed
as a great feature extraction tool.
And the whole concept is pretty solid
when we want our outputs to equate to our inputs.
But in this case, we want to extract more features
than just three, or just two,
or we want to extract an unrestricted amount of features.
And here, what we're seeing is that basically,
as soon as we do that, the autoencoder can cheat,
it can basically just take these inputs,
put them through the hidden layer and and input them
as outputs and without actually creating any
valuable feature extraction tool within itself
during a training process just because it's going
to be easier for autoencoder to do this.
And so we have to come up with a way to prevented
it from doing that.
And the first way we're looking at is called,
the sparse autoencoder.
And what I wanted to mention here is that you will hear
sparse autoencoder a lot, like a lot, a lot.
It is used everywhere,
or pretty much everywhere in literature.
And very often you will just hear sparse encoder
and people won't even explain why it's a sparse autoencoder?
what that means?
And it is sometimes even used interchangeably
within autoencoder.
As soon as you notice that you have to be aware
of what you're dealing with.
If you're dealing with nodes, the autoencoder
that we were working with before but this type
of autoencoder and that's why this tutorial so important.
So what is a sparse autoencoder?
A sparse autoencoder is an autoencoder
which looks like this, where the hidden layer is greater
than the input layer.
But a regularization technique which introduces sparsity
has been applied.
A regularization technique basically means something
that helps prevent over-fitting or stabilizes the algorithm.
In this case, if it was just sending the values through,
it would be over-fitting in a way.
And therefore, we need regularization techniques
and this sparse autoencoder is one of them.
And basically, what it does is it just says
it introduces a constraint on the loss function,
or a penalty of a loss function,
and which doesn't allow the autoencoder to use
all of its hidden layer every single time.
So every time or anytime, anytime at all.
So, at any time the autoencoder can only use a certain
number of nodes from it's hidden layer.
For instance, it can use two nodes in this case.
And so, when the values go through these nodes
are out putting very very small values,
so or very tiny values which are insignificant.
so it's not inputting insignificant values
and therefore only these nodes are actually participating.
Then in another pass these nodes are really participating.
Another pass these nodes are really participating.
So you are extracting features,
the essences that you are at the end of the day,
because you have so many rows in your data set
that are going through it,
at the end of the day you are training this whole layer.
So you are extracting features from each one of these nodes
through each one of these nodes.
But at the same time, not at any given pass,
you're not using all of these.
So the autoencoder cannot cheat because even though
it has more nodes in the hidden layer
than in the input layer,
it is not able to use all of them at any given pass.
And that's how the sparse autoencoder works.
Pretty straightforward technique.
Of course, it has mathematics behind it,
and we'll just now look through some further reading
that you can do.
But in essence, it's quite a simple idea,
quite a straightforward idea to still keep the size,
the large size of the hidden layer, but at the same time,
not allow the autoencoder to bypass the proper training
that we wanted to and we will.
And that's what is sparse autoencoder is.
So whenever you hear sparse autoencoder,
just remember that it's this kind of thing.
And in reality when you think about it,
it is still compressing the information
but just every time is using different nodes.
Okay, so let's have a look at the additional reading.
So we've got a interesting tutorial here by Chris McCormick
is called Deep Learning tutorial Sparse Autoencoder.
And this is a MATLAB tutorial.
So if there's any fans of MATLAB,
if you're a fan of MATLAB you might find this interesting.
He will walk you through how to do it in MATLAB.
But other than that, there's just, I like it because there's
some introductory mathematics, not too complex,
but some basic level formulas which allow you
to gently get introduced to the mathematics behind
the sparse autoencoders.
If you want to understand how that whole
how the equations work which don't allow the autoencoders
to switch on all of its nodes at the same time,
at any given point, at any given pass.
The next one is called, Deep Learning Sparse Autoencoders
by Eric Wilkinson.
It's a very short blog post on the essence
of sparse autoencoders.
It's literally like five to 10 minute read.
And just another gentle introduction to the world
of sparse autoencoders.
And finally a very strong powerful, heavy artillery paper
on sparse autoencoders.
It's called, K-Sparse Autoencoders by Alireza Makhzani, 2014
and it basically takes his whole sparse autoencoders concept
to a whole new level where it talks about different
like a parameter K which allows you to control
the sparsity of the auto encoder
and you got some examples over here on the right.
You might find this paper interesting if you want
to learn more about sparse encoders.
I actually would encourage you to learn a bit more
because it is a tool that is used all over the place
and it's constantly mentioned.
So you will definitely come across sparse autoencoders
if you are going to be dealing with autoencoders.
okay, so that's sparse autoencoders
and I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then, enjoy Deep Learning.